M toome kotlin functions (#1981)
Codecademy/docs: content/kotlin/concepts/functions/functions_in_kotlin.md

---
Title: 'Functions in Kotlin'
Description: 'Functions are the most essential part of kotlin'
Subjects: 
  - 'Mobile Development'
Tags: 
  - 'Android'
  - 'Functions'
  - 'Kotlin'
CatalogContent: 
  - 'learn-kotlin'
---

# Functions in Kotlin

> **Functions are an essential part of any Kotlin program.**Functions are a reusable part of code that can be called in any part of the program. The Kotlin program has to start with the `main()` function, or there will be an error. `fun` is used to define a function in Kotlin, but there are also predefined functions like `println `and `print`. Functions are called in the `main()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Functions** are an essential part of any Kotlin program. Functions are a reusable part of code that can be called in any part of the program. The Kotlin program has to start with the `main()` function, or there will be an error. `fun` is used to define a function in Kotlin, but there are also predefined functions like `println `and `print`.
```

## Function `main()`

> Function `main()` is the entry point to Kotlin programing and also required in every Kotlin program. The `main()` function is meant to include your code that you write and is not called anywhere. Check that your code is between the `main()` function curly brackets `{}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Function `main()` is the entry point to a Kotlin program and is required. The `main()` function is meant to include the code of the program and is not called anywhere. The code should be between the `main()` function curly brackets `{}`.
```

In Docs we avoid first and second person pronouns.

```
fun main() {
  println("Hello World")
}
```

> ## Creating functions in Kotlin ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Creating Functions in Kotlin
```

Use title case and have a line break before and after headers.

> User defined functions start with the `fun` keyword, followed by the function name, parameters (if there is any) and the function body which is enclosed in curly braces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User defined functions start with the `fun` keyword, followed by the function name, the parameters (if there are any), and the function body which is enclosed in curly braces.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```pseudo
````

fun functionName(arguments): return type {
  body
  return statment
}

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````
Line break after code block.

> + *fun* is used to define a function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fun` is used to define a function.
```

> + The *functionName* is used to call the function in the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `functionName` is used to call the function in the program.
```

> + *Arguments* have to be in the parentheses, arguments are pieces of information fed to the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Arguments` have to be in the parentheses. Arguments are pieces of information fed to the function.
```

> + *Return type* declares the type of a returning value. It is optional to include.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Return type` declares the type of a returning value. It is optional.
```

> + In the *body* contains the instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `body` contains the code to be executed.
```

> + *Return statment* returns the value of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Return statement` returns the value of the function.
```

### Arguments

> `Argument` is data inserted to function. `Arguments` must have a name and data type of inserted data. Between `argument` and `data type` must be a colon `:`. The arguments are separated by comma `,` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arguments are data passed to the function. They must have a name and data type. Between the argument name and data type must be a colon `:`. The arguments are separated by comma `,` .
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```pseudo
````
line break before code block.

> fun functionName(argumentName: dataType, argumentName2 : datatype){

Reviewer: Move the second example to the pseudocode example below that uses it. Also, since the second example is illustrating an actual function, include an actual body to go with it.

  body
}

fun sample(num1: Int,num2: Int){
  body
}
```

> When calling the function, `arguments` can be put in their assigned spot or defined by name. By defining by name the `arguments` do not need to be in the same order as in the function header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When calling the function, `arguments` can be put in their assigned spot or specified by name. By specifying the name the `arguments` do not need to be in the same order as in the function header.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```pseudo
````

fun main(){
  println(sample(3,5))
}
fun main(){
  println(sample(num2=5, num1=3))
}
```

> `Arguments` can have default value. It is assigned with equals sign `=`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arguments can have a default value. It is assigned with the equals sign `=`.
```

```
fun default(name: String = "Kotlin"){
  print("Hello $name")
}
```
Default `arguments` can be change when calling a function.
```
fun main(){
  default("Java")
}
///output
///Hello Java
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove extra line break

> ### Return type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Return Type
```

The `return type` expresses the returning value type. Entering `return type` is optional. `Return type` is after parentheses and colon `:`. By default the return value is `Unit`, `Unit` means there is no returning value.

```
fun functionName(argument): return type {
  body
}
fun sample(name: String): String {
  body
}
```

> ### Function body

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Function Body
```

> `Function body` has the instruction for the function. It must be between curly brackets `{}`. `Function body` is indented, except for single line function. The opening curly bracket `{` is at the end of the function header and the closing curly bracket `}` is below the last line of `function body`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function body contains the code for the function. It must be between curly brackets `{}`. The function body is indented, except for a single line function. The opening curly bracket `{` is at the end of the function header and the closing curly bracket `}` is below the last line of the function body.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```pseudo
````

fun functionName(argument) {
  bodyline1
  bodyline2
}
```

> ### Return statment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Return Statement
```

> If there is a `return statement` in the function,then there must be also a `return type`. `Return statement` is defined by keyword `return`. Lines after the `return statement` will not be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is a return statement in the function, then there must be also a return type. The return statement is defined by keyword `return`. Lines after the return statement will not be executed.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```pseudo
````

> fun adding(num1: Int,num2: Int): Int{

Reviewer: You only need the second of these examples, remove the first.

  var sum = num1 + num2
  //Return statement, returns the variable sum
  return sum
}

fun adding(num1: Int,num2: Int): Int{
  var sum = num1 + num2
  //Return statement, returns the variable sum
  return sum
  //println will not execute
  println("Nice job")
}
```

> ## Single line function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Single Line Function
```

> The single line function can be written only if the function has **single expression**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The single line function can be written only if the function has a single expression.
```

```
fun area(side1: Int, side2: Int): Int{
  return side1 * side2
}
```

> Curly brackets `{}` and `return` can be removed and by adding an equals sign `=`, we get the single line function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Curly brackets `{}` and `return` can be removed and by adding an equals sign `=`, we get the single line function.
```
line break after code block.

```
fun area(side1: Int, side2: Int): Int = side1 * side2
```

> The compiler can conclude the `return type` also, we can remove the `return type`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compiler can infer the return type so we can also remove the return type declaration.
```

```
fun area(side1: Int, side2: Int) = side1 * side2
```

## Function Literals

> Function becomes `function literal` when we assign it as a value. There are 2 types of function literals: `Lambda Expression` and `Anonymous Function`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function becomes a function literal when we assign it as a value. There are two types of function literals: "lambda expressions" and "anonymous functions".
```

> ### Lambda Expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Lambda Expressions
```

> `Lambda Expression` is a short function between curly braces `{}`. The `return` is replaced by `->`. Adding `return type` is optional because the compiler deduce it from the type interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lambda expression is a short function between curly braces `{}`. The `return` is replaced by `->`. Adding `return type` is optional because the compiler can infer it from the type interface.
```

Also, this is an incomplete description of the syntax. There's no `fun` keyword, no function name, and no parenthesis.

```
variable name = {Lambda Expression}

fun main() {
  //Lambad Expression
  val adding = {num1: Int, num2: Int -> num1 + num2 }
  //executing
  println(adding(1,2))
}

//output:
//3
```

### Anonymous Function

> `Anonymous function` is assigned as a variable, `fun` comes after equals sign `=` and has no name that`s why it is called anonymous. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An anonymous function is assigned as a variable, `fun` comes after equals sign `=`. It has no name, which is why it is called anonymous. 
```

> **Option One** `Anonymous Function`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After variable name is `argument type` in parentheses `()` then `-> return type` and `fun` is after equals sign `=`, `return statement` comes after `->` in curly brackets `{}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Option One: After the variable name is the argument types in parentheses `()` then `->` and the return type. This is followed by the equals sign `=` then the `fun` keyword, arguments in parenthesis, the return type, and the single return statement in curly braces `{}` .
```

> **Option Two** of `Anonymous Function`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After the variable name is equals sign `=`, then `fun` after it is argument with argument type in parentheses `()`, it is followed by `: return type` and the `return statement` in curly brackets `{}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Option Two: After the variable name is an equals sign `=`, then the `fun` keyword, followed by the arguments with argument types in parentheses `()`, followed by `:` and the return type, followed by a single return statement in curly brackets `{}`.
```
